---
layout: distill
title: BLDC Motor Control with PID Controller
description: BLDC Motor Control with NU32 micrcontroller and DRV8835 H-bridge motor driver
img: assets/img/motor/step.gif
importance: 12
category: other
related_publications: false
---

One of the fundamental aspects of robotics is motor control. This project uses the PIC32MX250F128B microcontroller mounted on board the NU32 board and a MATLAB-based GUI for the desired angle for the motor.

# HARDWARE
- Brushed DC motor 
- Motor encoder
- NU32 microcontroller board
- Quadrature encoder counter
- MAX9918 current-sense amplifier
- DRV8835 H-bridge
- 6V battery pack
- Resistors and capacitors

# SOFTWARE

The controller uses two feedback loops: 
- Inner high-frequency 5kHz current controller that controls the PWM output to the motor 
- Outer low-frequency 200Hz position controller that controls the motor

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/motor/diagram.png" title="diagram" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
   *Circuit Diagram*
</div>

## CURRENT CONTROL

The output torque of the motor is directly proportional to the current. Therefore, we change the amount of current in the motor to control the torque and speed of the motor. This process can be done by seeing that the duty cycle of a PWM signal corresponds to the desired torque. The MAX9918 current-sense amplifier is used to read the current at any given moment—specifically, it reads the current at 5kHz for the control loop, and a PI controller is implemented to set the right duty cycle.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/motor/current_control.jpg" title="cc" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
   *Performance of the Current Control*
</div>

## POSITION CONTROL

A PID controller is used for position control. It uses encoder information to determine how far the motor is from its desired position and calculates the required current needed to bring the motor to that position.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/motor/step.gif" title="stepf" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
   *Step Trajectory*
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/motor/step.jpg" title="step" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
   *Performance of the Position Control for a Step Trajectory*
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/motor/cubic.gif" title="cubicf" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
   *Cubic Trajectory*
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/motor/cubic.jpg" title="cubic" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
   *Performance of the Position Control for a Cubic Trajectory*
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/motor/comeback.gif" title="cb" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
   *Feedback Control Brings the Motor Back to the Desired Position*
</div>
