---
title: "[Robotic Hand 01] - What is a Robotic Hand?"
description: Breif Introduction of Robotic Hands
layout: distill
published: false
date: 2024-03-01 00:00:00
img: /assets/img/can/p1_optimo.jpg
permalink: /hand01/
tags: [Hardware Development,Robotic Manipulation]
# categories: robotics101

---
# Introduction to Robotic Hands

Robotic hands hold one of the most complex and challenging design problems in robotics. In order to successfully deploy robotic hands in real-world applications a robotic system requires 
- **Robust hardware** that can withstand various enviromental conditions, 
- **Advanced control algorithms** that can handle the complexity of high DoF muiti-kinematic chain structuresr
- **Reliable perception systems** to navigate and interact with the unstructured enviroments
- **Intelligent reasoning and planning algorithms** to make decisions and adapt to the environment. 

Thanks to rapid progress in artificial intelligence, especially deep learning, research in robotic manipulation has accelerated. Future posts will explore how learning-based approaches are advancing what robotic hands can do. For now, let's focus on the hardware design aspect of robotic hands, which is the foundation for all these advanced capabilities.

# What is a Robotic Hand? And How is it Different from a Gripper?



People often use “robotic hand” and “robotic gripper” interchangeably since both aim to grasp and manipulate objects, and one may think that robotic hands are just a more complex version of robotic grippers with high DoF (Degrees of Freedom) But there’s a deeper distinction—rooted in their fundamental design principles.

As architect Louis Sullivan famously said, “form follows function.” Though originally referring to architectectures, this principle applies directly to robotics as well: the structure of a robotic system should reflect what it is meant to do.

A robotic gripper is typically engineered for a narrow set of grasping tasks—like pick-n-place. These devices are often simple, with one or two active DoF, making them robust and efficient for applications like palletizing or sorting. In contrast, a robotic **hand** — as the name suggests— is inspired by the human hand which is capable of broad and complex range of interactions beyond grasping like the following examples:

- **Non-prehensile manipulation**: flicking, tapping, or pushing objects
- **In-hand manipulation**: rotating or shifting objects within the hand
- **Tactile interaction**: sensing texture, shape, or weight
- **Multi-contact support**: using hands to stabilize balance, like holding a railing during locomotion

These interactions are bidirectional: the hand not only acts on the environment but also perceives and responds to its feedback. I would define a robotic hand as:

>A human-inspired robotic end-effector composed of multiple kinematic chains (fingers), designed to enable bidirectional interaction with the environment through both forceful and perceptual contact.


# Why Need a Robotic Hand? - End-effectors in Robotic Manipulation

- The paradiam of robotic manipulation has shifted from manipulating known objects in controlled enviroments like a industrial assembly line to manipulating unknown objects in unstructured environments like home environment.
- In manipulation tasks in controlled environments, robotic gripper with 1 or 2 active DoF (Degrees of Freedom) are sufficient to grasp and manipulate objects. Most tasks are limited to palletizing tasks like pick-n-place, sorting, and stacking.
- For warehouse applications, air-suction grippers have been widely used due to their simplicity and robustness. Compared to jaw-gripper, it's able to grasp larger object with smaller gripper volume which makes it ideal for box loading unloading tasks.
- In robotic manipulation research, adpative grippers  have been actively used. 
- Adaptive grippers are able to grasp objects with different shapes and sizes by adapting their shape to the object often achieved by using compliant materials or mechanisms.
- Espcailly robot learning community favors end-effectors with less active control input to reduce the complexity of the control problem in learning.
- Numerous clever gripper design have been proposed which are capable of grasping versatile objects and achieve various manipulation tasks.
- Dexterous robotic hands are often used in problems that require high-DoF manipulation like in-hand manipulation and tool use.
- Before I define what a robotic hand is, let's take a look at robotic gripper. Robotic hands and grippers are often used inetrchangeably becuase they both serve the purpose of grasping and manipulating objects.
- One may think that robotic hands are just a more complex version of robotic grippers with high DoF, but there are fundamental differences between the two.





- I would like to define that a robotic hand is a type of human-hand inspired robotic end-effector with multi-kinematic chain structures (fingers) which are capable of interacting with the enviroment bidirectionally; interaction can be defined as the ability to apply forces and motions to the environment and receive forces and motions from the environment.







Robotic hands probably hold one of the most complex and challenging design problems in robotics. They need to be lightweight and compact while being able to produce sufficient grasping forces with multi-kinematic chain structures (fingers) with high degrees of freedom (DoF). Popular approaches to robotic hand design have been using servo motors with high gear ratio gearbox with small motors or using linear actuators to address space constraints while meeting grasping force requirements. Combining with mechanism such as cable (tendon) driven or linkage mechanisms, many robotic hands have shown human-like designs with high-DoF. Despite efforts to make highly dexterous robotic hands, simple robotic grippers with 1 or 2 DoF are still popular solution for grasping in robotic manipulation community due to their simplicity and robustness. In fact, many manipulation tasks such as opening a cabinet, grasping a cup, turning a knob of the faucet to get water, etc can be accomplished without having highly dexterous hands. That leads us to a fundamental question: "What are hands for, and how can we design robotic hands to be more effective in manipulation tasks?" Bhatia et al. [1] answers that hands are for interacting with the environment and proposes a new philosophy for robotic hand design which views a robotic hand not only as manipulation tool but also as an agent which can bidirectionally transmit forces and motion signals. The resulting hand design called the Drive Drive Hand (DDHand) priortizing force transparency with 4-DoF have demonstrated capabilites to safetly detect and respond rapidly to variations in the environment. This tells something about the direction of robotic hand design in the future.

# References
[1] Ankit Bhatia, Aaron M Johnson, and Matthew T Mason. Direct Drive Hands: Force-Motion Transparency in Gripper Design. In Robotics: Science and Systems 2019, 2019.